README.md, before:

# infodynamics-jax

**Inference as infodynamics** — A general-purpose library for Bayesian inference over energy landscapes.

## Overview

`infodynamics-jax` is a **general-purpose inference library** designed to support a wide range of applications:

- **Supervised learning**: GP regression, classification, etc.
- **Unsupervised learning**: GPLVM, latent GP models, etc.
- **Online inference**: IBIS, streaming data, etc.
- **Future applications**: RL, EGPF, RJVMC, etc.

The library provides a clean separation between:
- **Energy landscapes** (`energy/`): Define the inference objective
- **Inference dynamics** (`inference/`): Algorithms (MCMC, SMC, optimization)
- **Orchestration** (`infodynamics/`): Execution layer that composes energy + inference

## Design Principles

1. **Protocol-based**: Uses `EnergyTerm` and `InferenceMethod` protocols for maximum flexibility
2. **Application-agnostic**: No hardcoded assumptions about supervised/unsupervised/online scenarios
3. **Composable**: Energy functions, inference methods, and data views can be freely combined
4. **JAX-native**: Fully JIT-compatible, supports automatic differentiation

## Quick Start

**New to the library?** See [QUICKSTART.md](QUICKSTART.md) for a 5-minute introduction.

```python
import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp
from infodynamics_jax.core import Phi
from infodynamics_jax.gp.kernels.params import KernelParams
from infodynamics_jax.gp.kernels.rbf import rbf as rbf_kernel
from infodynamics_jax.gp.likelihoods import get as get_likelihood
from infodynamics_jax.energy import InertialEnergy, InertialCFG
from infodynamics_jax.inference.optimisation import MAP2, MAP2CFG
from infodynamics_jax.infodynamics import run, RunCFG

# Generate data
key = jax.random.key(0)
X = jnp.linspace(-3, 3, 30)[:, None]
Y = jnp.sin(X[:, 0]) + 0.1 * jax.random.normal(key, (30,))

# Initialize model
phi_init = Phi(
    kernel_params=KernelParams(lengthscale=jnp.array(1.0), variance=jnp.array(1.0)),
    Z=jnp.linspace(-3, 3, 10)[:, None],
    likelihood_params={"noise_var": jnp.array(0.1)},
    jitter=1e-5,
)

# Create energy and run MAP-II
energy = InertialEnergy(
    kernel_fn=rbf_kernel,
    likelihood=get_likelihood("gaussian"),
    cfg=InertialCFG(estimator="gh", gh_n=20),
)

method = MAP2(cfg=MAP2CFG(steps=100, lr=1e-2))
out = run(key=key, method=method, energy=energy, phi_init=phi_init, energy_args=(X, Y))
phi_opt = out.result.phi  # Optimized hyperparameters
```

## Architecture

```
infodynamics_jax/
├── core/          # Core data structures (Phi, SupervisedData, LatentData)
├── energy/        # Energy functionals (EnergyTerm protocol)
├── gp/            # GP components (kernels, likelihoods, ansatz)
├── inference/     # Inference dynamics (InferenceMethod protocol)
│   ├── optimisation/  # VGA, MAP2
│   ├── particle/      # AnnealedSMC, IBIS
│   └── sampling/      # HMC, NUTS, MALA, Slice
└── infodynamics/  # Orchestration layer (runner.run)
```

## Key Features

- **Multiple inference methods**: HMC, NUTS, MALA, Slice, Annealed SMC, IBIS, VGA, MAP2
- **Flexible energy composition**: InertialEnergy, PriorEnergy, TargetEnergy, etc.
- **Non-conjugate support**: Gauss-Hermite and Monte Carlo estimators
- **Hyperprior utilities**: L2, log-L2 priors on kernel/likelihood parameters
- **Data views**: SupervisedData, LatentData with batch/prefix operations

## Examples

Check out our comprehensive example notebooks in the `examples/` directory:

1. **[Basic GP Regression](examples/notebook_01_basic_regression.ipynb)** - Introduction to MAP-II optimization
2. **[Different Kernels](examples/notebook_02_different_kernels.ipynb)** - Comparing RBF, Matérn, Periodic kernels
3. **[GP Classification](examples/notebook_03_classification.ipynb)** - Non-conjugate likelihoods
4. **[Annealed SMC](examples/notebook_04_annealed_smc.ipynb)** - Full Bayesian inference
5. **[Online IBIS](examples/notebook_05_online_ibis.ipynb)** - Streaming data processing

See [examples/README.md](examples/README.md) for setup instructions.

## Documentation

- **[Quick Start Guide](QUICKSTART.md)** - Get started in 5 minutes
- **[Examples README](examples/README.md)** - How to run examples
- [Energy Design](docs/energy_design.md)
- [Design Documents](docs/design/)
- [Contributing Guide](docs/contributing_energy.md)

## Installation

### Option 1: Development Mode (Recommended)

```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd infodynamics-jax
pip install -e .
```

### Option 2: Manual Dependencies

```bash
pip install jax jaxlib optax numpy scipy matplotlib jupyter
```

## License

[Add your license here]

## Related Projects

This library is designed to be used by application-specific projects:
- `probabilistic-image-synthesis`: Image synthesis application (uses this library)
- Future: RL, EGPF, RJVMC applications

Commit message:

Add Apache 2.0 license and update project documentation
- Add Apache License 2.0 (2026)
- Update README with positioning statement and IP attribution notice
- Update setup.py license classifier to Apache Software License
- Add API_BOUNDARY_ANALYSIS.md and FILE_TREE.md documentation
- Remove unused models/ directory
- Clean up example files

README.md, after:

# infodynamics-jax

infodynamics-jax is a library of composable primitives for explicit probabilistic inference.

The project provides mathematically specified building blocks—energies, generative models, and inference dynamics—designed for transparency, analysis, and reproducibility.

System-level configurations, performance-tuned execution pipelines, and domain-specific inference recipes are intentionally not part of the public release.

This separation follows standard practice in probabilistic machine learning, where scientific primitives are shared openly, while system composition remains application-dependent.

**Inference as infodynamics** — A general-purpose library for Bayesian inference over energy landscapes.

## Overview

`infodynamics-jax` is a **general-purpose inference library** designed to support a wide range of applications:

- **Supervised learning**: GP regression, classification, etc.
- **Unsupervised learning**: GPLVM, latent GP models, etc.
- **Online inference**: IBIS, streaming data, etc.
- **Future applications**: RL, EGPF, RJVMC, etc.

The library provides a clean separation between:
- **Energy landscapes** (`energy/`): Define the inference objective
- **Inference dynamics** (`inference/`): Algorithms (MCMC, SMC, optimization)
- **Orchestration** (`infodynamics/`): Execution layer that composes energy + inference

## Design Principles

1. **Protocol-based**: Uses `EnergyTerm` and `InferenceMethod` protocols for maximum flexibility
2. **Application-agnostic**: No hardcoded assumptions about supervised/unsupervised/online scenarios
3. **Composable**: Energy functions, inference methods, and data views can be freely combined
4. **JAX-native**: Fully JIT-compatible, supports automatic differentiation

## Quick Start

**New to the library?** See [QUICKSTART.md](QUICKSTART.md) for a 5-minute introduction.

```python
import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp
from infodynamics_jax.core import Phi
from infodynamics_jax.gp.kernels.params import KernelParams
from infodynamics_jax.gp.kernels.rbf import rbf as rbf_kernel
from infodynamics_jax.gp.likelihoods import get as get_likelihood
from infodynamics_jax.energy import InertialEnergy, InertialCFG
from infodynamics_jax.inference.optimisation import MAP2, MAP2CFG
from infodynamics_jax.infodynamics import run, RunCFG

# Generate data
key = jax.random.key(0)
X = jnp.linspace(-3, 3, 30)[:, None]
Y = jnp.sin(X[:, 0]) + 0.1 * jax.random.normal(key, (30,))

# Initialize model
phi_init = Phi(
    kernel_params=KernelParams(lengthscale=jnp.array(1.0), variance=jnp.array(1.0)),
    Z=jnp.linspace(-3, 3, 10)[:, None],
    likelihood_params={"noise_var": jnp.array(0.1)},
    jitter=1e-5,
)

# Create energy and run MAP-II
energy = InertialEnergy(
    kernel_fn=rbf_kernel,
    likelihood=get_likelihood("gaussian"),
    cfg=InertialCFG(estimator="gh", gh_n=20),
)

method = MAP2(cfg=MAP2CFG(steps=100, lr=1e-2))
out = run(key=key, method=method, energy=energy, phi_init=phi_init, energy_args=(X, Y))
phi_opt = out.result.phi  # Optimized hyperparameters
```

## Architecture

```
infodynamics_jax/
├── core/          # Core data structures (Phi, SupervisedData, LatentData)
├── energy/        # Energy functionals (EnergyTerm protocol)
├── gp/            # GP components (kernels, likelihoods, ansatz)
├── inference/     # Inference dynamics (InferenceMethod protocol)
│   ├── optimisation/  # VGA, MAP2
│   ├── particle/      # AnnealedSMC, IBIS
│   └── sampling/      # HMC, NUTS, MALA, Slice
└── infodynamics/  # Orchestration layer (runner.run)
```

## Key Features

- **Multiple inference methods**: HMC, NUTS, MALA, Slice, Annealed SMC, IBIS, VGA, MAP2
- **Flexible energy composition**: InertialEnergy, PriorEnergy, TargetEnergy, etc.
- **Non-conjugate support**: Gauss-Hermite and Monte Carlo estimators
- **Hyperprior utilities**: L2, log-L2 priors on kernel/likelihood parameters
- **Data views**: SupervisedData, LatentData with batch/prefix operations

## Examples

Check out our comprehensive example notebooks in the `examples/` directory:

1. **[Basic GP Regression](examples/notebook_01_basic_regression.ipynb)** - Introduction to MAP-II optimization
2. **[Different Kernels](examples/notebook_02_different_kernels.ipynb)** - Comparing RBF, Matérn, Periodic kernels
3. **[GP Classification](examples/notebook_03_classification.ipynb)** - Non-conjugate likelihoods
4. **[Annealed SMC](examples/notebook_04_annealed_smc.ipynb)** - Full Bayesian inference
5. **[Online IBIS](examples/notebook_05_online_ibis.ipynb)** - Streaming data processing

See [examples/README.md](examples/README.md) for setup instructions.

## Documentation

- **[Quick Start Guide](QUICKSTART.md)** - Get started in 5 minutes
- **[Examples README](examples/README.md)** - How to run examples
- [Energy Design](docs/energy_design.md)
- [Design Documents](docs/design/)
- [Contributing Guide](docs/contributing_energy.md)

## Installation

### Option 1: Development Mode (Recommended)

```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd infodynamics-jax
pip install -e .
```

### Option 2: Manual Dependencies

```bash
pip install jax jaxlib optax numpy scipy matplotlib jupyter
```

## License

This project is licensed under the **Apache License 2.0**.

You may use, modify, and distribute this library (including in commercial and closed-source projects) as long as you:

- **Include a copy of the Apache 2.0 license** (see the `LICENSE` file).
- **Preserve copyright and attribution notices**.
- **State clearly if you have modified the files**.
- **Respect the patent license terms** described in the Apache 2.0 license.

See the `LICENSE` file for the full license text.

## IP and Attribution Notice

This research was conducted while the author was affiliated with the University of Cambridge; however, the software is released as an independent project.
All copyrights in the codebase are retained by the author(s) and licensed under the Apache License 2.0.

## Related Projects

This library is designed to be used by application-specific projects:
- `probabilistic-image-synthesis`: Image synthesis application (uses this library)
- Future: RL, EGPF, RJVMC applications
